Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in our last video
we introduced the idea of arrays as lists of lists
and I mentioned that there's another way that
we're going to have of thinking about objects
which are like arrays mainly matrices so in
today's video I want to have an overview of
the standard approach to matrices which of course
play a very big role in linear algebra objects
like this and then at the end we are going to move
towards a very novel approach to the definition
and understanding of what's going on with matrices
like this in fact the overall setup of linear
algebra so we are going to be moving towards the
position where when you look at something like
this you're going to think about it in a quite a
new way it's going to be a sort of a seismic shift
in your understanding and orientation towards
these very fundamental objects in mathematics
so very exciting stuff happening today so let me
overview the traditional point of view towards
matrices which are core objects of linear algebra
so this is really very much part of a setting up
of basic linear algebra if you are interested in
learning a little bit more about linear algebra i
recommend my youtube series wild lin alg which
gives an elementary approach to linear algebra
from a geometrical point of view so traditionally
in linear algebra course one starts with objects
like this define in a very visual way we say
that an array of numbers a table of numbers of
this particular form as a matrix and we would talk
about its dimensions being two by three it's a 2
by 3 matrix because it has two rows and 3 columns
here for example is a 2 by 2 matrix you see that
the entries could also be rational numbers
negative numbers here's another 2 by 2 matrix
which plays an important role the identity matrix
which is 1001 that's a 2 by 2 identity matrix
okay so there's a number of basic things that we
can do with matrices even at this introductory
level if we have matrices of the same size then
they can be added subtracted and multiplied by
scalars or numbers so here are two matrices are
the same size they're both 2 by 3 matrices to
add them you just add them component wise so the
top left entry here and the top left entry there
add to give the top left entry there this one by
two entry and this one by two entry here combine
to give the one by two entry there so we just do
everything component wise very simple subtraction
is exactly the same if we take this two-by-two
matrix and subtract this two-by-two matrix you
get 5 minus 1 is 4 8-9 is minus 1 minus 4 minus 2
is minus 6 and 7 minus 5 is 2 and the other thing
that we can do is multiply a matrix with a scalar
or a number so 6 times this matrix is what you get
when you just multiply each of the elements
by six if we only had addition subtraction
and scalar multiplication then matrix arithmetic
wouldn't be that interesting and that useful what
makes it really important is that there's a matrix
multiplication as well so here's how we multiply
matrices it's not what you might think it's not
point wise multiplication so here's a 2 by 2
matrix and here's another 2 by 2 matrix we can
form the product that's as it turns out another
2 by 2 matrix but it's not the case that this
62 here is the product of two times one rather
to get this 62 here what we do is we multiply the
first row in the left-hand matrix with the first
column of the second hand matrix now we do that in
a very particular way we take the two here and we
multiply it by the one here two times one and then
we add the product of five times 12 so we have two
products the product here in the product here
and we add those two products to get a total of
sixty-two now when we move over to this entry here
we are still sort of multiplying rose by columns
but now it's this first row here x this second
column so it's 2 times 7 plus 5 times 4 for a
total of thirty-four and then down here minus 30
we take this second row times the first column so
6 times 1 plus minus 3 times 12 is minus 30 and
finally this 30 here is this second row times the
second column 6 times 7 plus minus 3 times 4 total
of three so in each case we're multiplying a roll
by a column and there's two rows and there's
two columns in this case so there's two times
two equals four possibilities and there they are
there and that matrix there so this operation is
often viewed as an extension of just a sort of
more elementary operation of just multiplying a
single row vector by a single column vector so
if we have say slightly larger vector a vector
with three components there and three components
there we can also multiply these two the important
thing is that they have the same size so the way
we multiply these two vectors this row vector by
this column vector is it again to take 1 x 2 plus
three x minus 5 plus 7 times 4 so we're forming a
sum of products in this case that happens to be 2
minus 15 plus 28 which is 15 that case it's just a
single number and in the matrix world we like the
output of products to be matrices so that would
be a 1 by 1 matrix which is just that number with
the brackets around it so matrix multiplication in
general is really repeated operations involving
the same basic operation of multiplying a row by
a column and we basically go through all the
possible rows or the left-hand matrix all the
possible column the right hand matrix and we write
down each of those various possible products in
the product matrix now the n-by-n matrices so
if we take matrices which are square they have
the same number of rows and columns of a fixed
size then they form an algebra that means we have
the operations of addition and multiplication and
subtraction and division to at least partially and
there's relatively pleasant laws of arithmetic
that parallel the usual laws of arithmetic for
normal numbers so for example the addition is
commutative a plus B equals B plus a it's also
associative a plus B plus C equals a plus B plus
C however the multiplication which is a little
bit more subtle does not have the commutative
property this is a very important point so a
B is not in general equal to BA sometimes it
can be but typically it's not nevertheless the
associative law for multiplication does hold and
this is a quite interesting and almost remarkable
fact it's not entirely obvious at all that that
rather complicated multiplication that we got
by multiplying rows and columns and repeating that
it has this property that if you take a B and then
multiply that by see it's the same as multiplying
a by B see there are also distributive laws you
need their case and there's some logs having
to do with scalar multiplication what happens
when you multiply a matrix by a scalar it's also
useful to mention this identity matrix in general
so if you have an N by n situation here's the
corresponding n-by-n identity matrix has one's
down this diagonal it's called the diagonal and
everything else is a zero so this identity matrix
has the property that when you multiply it by
any matrix a of the same size in either order
you get the other matrix you might like to check
that that's the case it's an interesting check of
the matrix multiplication now what about division
so there is a partial kind of notion of division
around and it's a little bit more subtle than one
might think so it turns out that some matrices
are invertible and some aren't so invertible
means that you can find another matrix a B so
that a times B is the same as B times a equals
the identity matrix so we're finding a sort of
an inverse B would be called the inverse of a it
has to be a two-sided inverse so that it has the
property that you can multiply it by a on either
side and get this identity matrix this identity
matrix is playing the role of one so this is sort
of the matrix equivalent of taking the reciprocal
of a number so it turns out that to tell whether
given matrix is invertible or not is rather a
subtle issue and depends on the determinant so
it happens just when the determinant of a is not
zero what's the determinant of a matrix well
for a two-by-two matrix it's relatively easy
to say the two by two matrix ABCD has determined
an ad minus BC we've seen that expression before
for higher bigger matrices the corresponding
definition of determinant is more subtle so
the theory of matrices then sort of overlaps
considerably with this theory of determinants
which surprisingly really sort of came before the
theory of matrices themselves were also officially
brought into being so determinants were much
studied in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
okay so there's a pleasant kind of structure
in the arithmetic of n by n matrices where you
fix an annual so I'm giving you a rather brief
overview here of stuff that takes weeks to lay
out in a linear algebra course but a natural
question is what are these matrices good for
why do we need them while they arise in linear
algebra as concrete examples of what are called
linear transformations and I can illustrate
that perhaps in an example here so here is a
3 by 3 matrix let's call an A and here is a
3 by 1 matrix which is also called a column
vector we call that fee now we can multiply this
matrix a by this column vector in the same kind
of way as we talked about before we're going to
multiply the rows of a by this single column so
the first row times the column would be 3 times 1
plus 1 times 4 plus 2 times 4 so 3 plus 4 plus 8
is 15 then the next entry would be this row times
the same column that's 2 plus 0 plus 10 for total
of twelve and then the last entry would be the
third row here times this column minus 1 plus 24
minus four for a total of 19 so what we get is
another column vector of the same size in this
case call it W so the equation can be written
as a times B equals W and we can interpret this
as something happening to V to change to W so in
functional notation if we allow ourselves to use
this temporarily so W is equal to T of V telling
us that we start with v sort of the input we apply
this transformation in this case multiplying by
this matrix a and then the output is this other
vector W so this transformation going from
this vector to this vector has two important
properties that define what's called linearity
so the properties are that T of v1 plus v2 is
T of V 1 plus T of V 2 as I can lay that T of
lambda equals lambda T of V these two properties
define what we mean by a linear transformation and
then it turns out that any linear transformation
from a three-dimensional space to itself is
necessarily of the form this for some three
by three matrix so the linear transformations and
the matrices become basically the same things this
linear transformation and this matrix are almost
the same thing and that's really a motivating
reason why matrices are studied because they
represent linear transformations for us linear
transformations could be things like rotations of
three dimensional space or maybe reflections or
maybe some kind of shears or dilations so it's
a very pleasant powerful algebraic arithmetic
that actually encodes these geometrical movements
it's very nice idea very powerful idea so again if
you'd like some more detail about linear algebra i
suggest having a look at my wild and alg series so
what we've just been talking about this idea
of having a matrix and then getting a linear
transformation we had an example that was in the
N by n case actually was 3 by 3 it turns out that
that correspondence extends in an important
way it generalizes to linear transformations
between different dimensional spaces and that
ends up corresponding to matrices which are not
necessarily square matrices say M by n matrices
with M rows and n columns such a matrix turns
out to correspond to a transformation from
n-dimensional space VN to M dimensional space
vm I'm going to illustrate that here's a 2 by 3
matrix and we can multiply that 2 by 3 matrix by
a 3 by 1 matrix or a column vector on the right
we need to have three here because there's three
here and way we multiply the row and the column
we need the same number of entries here as are
here so if we do this multiplication we get 12
minus two minus 18 for a total of minus 8 and 21
minus 1 plus 30 for a total of fifty but notice
that in this case there are only two outputs
pieces only two rows so we started with a three
dimensional vector and we've ended up with a two
dimensional vector and that's no surprise that's
because we were multiplying by this two by three
matrix so the 2 by 3 matrix takes a 3 vector to a
2 vector okay so now we can appreciate why matrix
multiplication is important now because now that
we have this association of matrices with linear
transformations there's a very natural thing
that we can do with linear transformations and
that is to compose them so if we have one linear
transformation say from v2 to v3 at another linear
transformation from V 3 to say v2 then we can
compose them it means we can do first this one
and this one then the composition will be as it
turns out another linear transformation a third
linear transformation that just takes this vector
and gives you a vector here and it turns out that
this composition of linear transformations
corresponds exactly on the matrix side to the
matrix multiplication that we introduced earlier
that's why matrix multiplication is important and
useful so for example in this situation here
suppose that a was this matrix for two months
3715 and B was some other matrix in this case a
three by two matrix 120 2 minus one minus three
then I'll let you check that the product of these
two major easeus see and this product of matrices
corresponds on the linear transformation side to
this diagram here multiplying by B would take a
vector to a three vector and then multiplying
by a just as up here would take a three vector
to a two vector so multiplying by be first
and then by a the total effect is to take a
two vector to a two vector and that turns out
to be a linear transformation whose matrix is
exactly this two-by-two matrix C obtained by
multiplying a and B so composition of linear
transformations corresponds to multiplication of
matrices and that's why matrix multiplication is
important and it's important also that this matrix
multiplication is flexible enough to deal with
matrices which are not necessarily the same size
the crucial thing is that the number of columns
in other words sort of the width here equals the
number of rows here so the height here because
we need to be able to multiply these two matrices
we're taking this times this persist on this Plus
this times this in order for that to work it's got
to be the same number here as there are here so
you can't multiply any two matrices the dimensions
sort of have to match up the inner dimensions have
to match up so matrix algebra is a little bit
richer than we might at first think because
of this fact that we can multiply matrices of
different sizes and in terms of the sizes here's
how it works so if a is a K by L matrix and B is
an l by a matrix then a times B equals C is well
defined it's because there's an L here and there's
an L here these two numbers are the same that
allows you to multiply the two matrices l will be
the number of columns in the first matrix number
of rows in the second Matrix and that allows
you to make those products of row vectors by
column vectors and the result then is the matrix
of size K times n which is the other two numbers
which are involved okay in the app so this is
now then in addition to the arithmetic of the
individual matrix algebra the one by one matrices
the two-by-two matrices in the three by three
matrices and so on each of these is a well-defined
little domain of arithmetic so just inside the
three by three matrices you can do all these
operations just inside the two-by-two matrices you
can do all these operations and so on so but in
addition you can also multiply these sort of non
square type matrices which otherwise don't really
fit into this situation here so it's a rather
rich arithmetic instructor all of these matrices
floating around so we've had an overview of matrix
theory as it's usually presented in a linear
algebra course and very interesting and important
topic but what we would like to do is to move the
subject in a little bit of a different direction
by bringing to the fore some combinatorial
essentially data theoretical structures which
are sitting underneath the matrix theory which are
perhaps not entirely visible these days so we want
to make them visible and give them the stature
that they deserve this will clarify lots of things
okay and it will open our eyes to a larger Vista
for matrix theory so a new look at matrices the
first new definition is that of a pixel usually
a pixel is something that we associate with a
little point in a digital diagram and its meaning
here is in that direction as well as we'll see but
officially for us a pixel is going to be a to
list from natural numbers two lists from that
that means it's a list with two entries each of
which is a natural number so here is a a is a
pixel here is B it's also a pixel these are lists
so they're allowed to have repeated entries now we
have seen these kinds of things before of course
because these look just like points points from
affine space or from Euclidean geometry and they
are very much like that those are also two lists
but here were restricting the elements to be in
natural numbers and we're using slightly different
notation and certainly different terminology
remember that zero is not officially a natural
number so the smallest pixel is this one here
11 a few other definitions so a pixel of the
particular kind and n where the two entries are
equal will be called a diagonal pixel and for a
pixel a equals mn1 natural thing that we can do
with this thing is just to swap the two entries
and we're going to give that a name so we'll call
that the transpose now with denoted with an a with
the superscript T capital T so I refers to the
transpose of a and there it is there it's n/m
so we've defined some new objects and let's give
these new objects a type name ok so the type now
will be pics and you can think of pics as being a
natural two-dimensional generalization of natural
numbers natural numbers just go one two three
four five so onions from one direction now we're
allowed two directions we have a first coordinate
a second coordinate they're both natural numbers
this is going to be a pretty interesting
type of object for us and now let's talk
about visualization we're human beings we like
to draw pictures so how are we going to visualize
pixels well let me remind you of natural numbers
in natural numbers we can visualize them just by
having a list sort of a discrete number line 1 2
3 4 5 and so on we can extend we want to consider
a two dimensional version of this because pixels
are really just two dimensional version of natural
numbers and we're going to do that by introducing
this particular notation we're going to call this
the screen okay the screen is going to be a
particular way of organizing pixels starting
up here in the top left so increasing the second
coordinates as we go to the right longhrow and
increasing the first coordinates as we go down
a long column so here is 11 then 12 13 14 and
so on so we could extend and then the next row 21
22 23 24 and so on and then 31 32 33 34 and so on
and then we could keep going next one will be 41
42 43 44 45 and so on so this is a visual guide a
visual aid that helps us picture this new type
this new type that we just defined called pics
and we refer to this visualization as the screen
at this screen gives us that pics is really a two
dimensional version of that natural numbers pics
they're naturally related that's a one dimensional
discrete kind of framework is a two dimensional
discrete kind of framework it's important that
we adopt the convention that we're starting up
in the top left and that we're going to number
things or label things in this order just as we've
shown here so now we come to the main definition
which is going to underpin our new approach to
the algebra of matrices in that section of linear
algebra we're going to introduce this concept
called a maximal okay so maximal is supposed to
rhyme with pixel and there's a close connection
so a maximal is by definition of multi set of
pixels so we're using our data structure point of
view of the various loms we're choosing multi set
so for example here is a multi set consisting
of pixels the pixel 11 13 to 21 3 24 and 24
notice that there is no commas telling us that
rearrangement is allowed and also repetitions are
allowed because of the brackets on the outside so
there are 2 13 s we could also see two two fours
okay so these are going to be fundamental objects
for us and we want to visualize this thing okay
and we're to visualize is Maxell by recording
its multiplicities on the screen would do very
similar kind of thing to what we did when we were
talking about multi sets of natural numbers and
corresponding lists where we could count the
number ones count the number of two is count
the number of threes and so on in a multi set and
then associate to that the list of multiplicities
we're doing the same thing here except that now
we have a kind of two-dimensional representation
of the multiplicities because the objects
themselves form this two-dimensional grid
actually what we're calling a screen so here
is our screen which is just a way of organizing
our various pixels and so now we can have a look
at what are the various multiplicities of these
pixels in this multi set m11 occurs once so we
put a one in that position one to occur is 0 x
13 occurs twice and 14 occurs not at all then
21 occurs not at all 22 occurs once 23 doesn't
occur and 24 occurs twice at this point we can
stop because we've recorded all of the objects
in this maxell so while in principle we could
go on and extend we would only be adding zeros
by doing so so this already in capture is the
multiplicities in our maxell and what write
this in a somewhat familiar way and we recognize
a matrix so this suggests to us that this matrix
can be thought of now as actually representing
multiplicities of pixels in a maxell so matrices
are appearing here in a quite a different way
matrix is this sense just a picture of a maxell
and we're going to see that these maxwell's
allow us to reformulate a lot of interesting
things about linear algebra especially matrix
algebra so in our next video we're going to
look more at maxwell's i hope you'll join me for
that i'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening